# FoAM Kernow business learnings

*Disclaimer: I am not a lawyer or accountant. These are findings,
general principles and guesswork relating to FoAM Kernow only, so
please get professional advice on these matters.*

What we are:

* A private company limited by guarantee.
* A 'non-profit' - more a US definition than a UK one but more widely understood.
* An SME (according to UK and EU rules).
* A research organisation (according to EU rules, as we have been registered and have a PIC number).
* A social enterprise - no strict definition exists but over 50% (100%!) of our profits are put back into the company to achieve our aims as specified in our articles of association.

# Tax

## PAYE

TODO 

## VAT

TO FINISH

Getting an audit...

### FoAM Kernow VAT classification rules

VAT is payable on income that for work that is regarded as a supply...

There is no hard and fast legal definition from HMRC that can cover
all cases, so we have to interpret the rules and come to a decision as
best we can.

We regard project as classified as a supply unless our role is as a
partner organisation on a grant funded research project, or we are
receiving direct funding (ACE, FEAST, British Science Association).

To be classified as support:

* We need to be named on the funding proposal document.  
* There is no contract, or if there is it is in the form of a 
  collaboration agreement.

## Corporation Tax

Will be the sum of:

* 20% of what you have left in the bank account at your year end.
* Unpaid invoices for work carried out in that tax year.
 
Corporation tax is later recalculated based on your actual profit/loss
the following year.

As we are a non-profit our profit/loss must necessarily equal zero
over a sufficiently long time scale (as there is no legal way we can
extract money that does not show as an loss, unlike dividends to
shareholders).

However we must still complete corporation tax returns, which
sometimes we will need to pay out when we happen to show a profit, the
next year they will be paid back as a rebate when we show a
loss. Seems a waste of paperwork and time for us and HMRC both, as
well as needing to be taken into account for cashflow, but there we
go.

### R&D Tax Relief

Looking at the document [currently
here](https://www.gov.uk/guidance/corporation-tax-research-and-development-rd-relief)
and [the details currently
here](https://www.gov.uk/guidance/corporation-tax-research-and-development-rd-relief#uncertain)
we are eligible to ease the cash flow problem with corporation tax and
even potentially get some extra back by claiming for R&D tax
relief. 

Although we are a research organisation, the definitions are quite
specific (unlike those for VAT supply) so a conservative approach to
this is required. 

The more of these which are true, the more likely it is that a project
counts as R&D.

* Funding is classified as support rather than supply with regard to VAT.
* It's stated as a research project in the proposal.
* It is a prototype rather than a finished article.
* We expect to publish the work in academic journals.
* It is an open source project, so not solely for company gain. 
* It is a technological development of a natural sciences project.

Good candidates for this include Viruscraft and Sonic Kayaks.

What we can claim back:

* Director or employee salaries (time).
* Possibly 65% of subcontractor costs (as an SME) but there are further details for this.
* Material costs.

To quote the .gov:

> To be R&D, a company must be undertaking a project to seek an advance
> in science or technology through the resolution of scientific or
> technological uncertainties.

We make the claim that our citizen science projects fit under this
classification, and the results of the game (e.g. egglab) are used to
answer scientific questions.

Even our 'educational' games (in the case of viruscraft) qualify as we
are carrying out broader research in the form of workshops, developing
simulation models - and this has the capacity to lead to scientific
understanding (e.g. the hungry birds game where player's behaviour
during an educational game highlighted bad assumptions in the
underlying genetic modelling to do with predator perception).

> The advance being sought must constitute an advance in the overall
> knowledge or capability in a field of science or technology, not a
> company’s own state of knowledge or capability alone.

Two strong points here which :

* We regularly publish in peer reviewed journals - both regarding the
  insights generated by our work, and the work itself as novel
  methods.

* All our work is published free software/creative commons/open
source/open hardware - therefore they are able to be used to advance
broader technological uncertainties outside of our company, and have
been (we don't always know about this, but e.g. the fluxus shader code
being used in Penelope visualisations to model brain scans by a
researcher in a neuroscience project for example).

Interestingly:

> If a particular advance in science or technology has already been
> made or attempted but details are not readily available (for
> example, if it is a trade secret), work to achieve such an advance
> can still be an advance in science or technology.

So reverse engineering is covered. However:

> Science is the systematic study of the nature and behaviour of the
> physical and material universe. Work in the arts, humanities and
> social sciences, including economics, is not science for the purpose
> of these guidelines. Mathematical techniques are frequently used in
> science, but mathematical advances in and of themselves are not
> science unless they are advances in representing the nature and
> behaviour of the physical and material universe.

So our citizen science work with the natural sciences is clearer than
work with penelope or for example livecoding projects when they are
treated as purely cultural research (which isn't usually the bit we
are directly involved in). It is clearer via technological
development:

> 17. Technology is the practical application of scientific principles
> and knowledge, where ‘scientific’ is based on the definition of
> science above.

It's possible that mongoose 2000 would be covered by this, as it's
published in a methods paper - but I don't feel happy with this
entirely.

> Similarly, work on combining standard technologies, devices, and/or
> processes can involve scientific or technological uncertainty even
> if the principles for their integration are well known. There will
> be scientific or technological uncertainty if a competent
> professional working in the field cannot readily deduce how the
> separate components or sub-systems should be combined to have the
> intended function.

This could really apply to a lot of software projects, as we tend to
use fairly conceptually straightforward projects (lions, cricket
tales) as experiments in combining new technologies.

> The design, construction, and testing of prototypes generally fall
> within the scope of R&D for tax purposes.

It's also ok for R&D projects to fail, which is nice.

